feat: Support OpenShift external IDP (#3024)
codenvy/che-docs: modules/administration-guide/pages/installing-che-on-openshift-with-keycloak-as-oidc.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
:description: Installing {prod-short} on OpenShift with {keycloak} as external identity provider
:keywords: overview, installing, openshift, keycloak, oidc
:navtitle: Installing {prod-short} on OpenShift with {keycloak} as external identity provider

[id="installing-che-on-openshift-with-keycloak-as-oidc"]

> = Installing {prod-short} on OpenShift with {keycloak} as external identity provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Installing {prod-short} on Red Hat OpenShift with {keycloak} as an external identity provider
```

> = Installing {prod-short} on OpenShift with {keycloak} as external identity provider

Reviewer: Procedure titles must use imperative form. Also update `:description:` (line 2) and `:navtitle:` (line 4) to match.

```suggestion
= Install {prod-short} on OpenShift with {keycloak} as external identity provider
```

> You can Install {prod-short} on OpenShift when Keycloak is configured as an external identity provider for the cluster.

Reviewer: "Install" capitalized mid-sentence. Hardcoded "Keycloak" — use `{keycloak}`. "You can" restates title without WHY.

```suggestion
Install {prod-short} on an OpenShift cluster that uses {keycloak} as an external OIDC identity provider for centralized user authentication.
```

.Prerequisites

> * An active `oc` session with administrative permissions to the OpenShift cluster. See link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/{ocp4-ver}/cli_reference/openshift_cli/getting-started-cli.html[Getting started with the OpenShift CLI].

Reviewer: Hardcoded `oc` — use `{orch-cli}` for consistency with procedure steps.

```suggestion
* An active `{orch-cli}` session with administrative permissions to the OpenShift cluster. See link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/{ocp4-ver}/cli_reference/openshift_cli/getting-started-cli.html[Getting started with the OpenShift CLI].
```

> * {keycloak} is configured as an external identity provider for OpenShift. See link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/latest/html/authentication_and_authorization/external-auth[Enabling direct authentication with an external OIDC identity provider].

Reviewer: `/latest/` in URL — use `{ocp4-ver}` for version consistency (line 14 already uses it).

```suggestion
* {keycloak} is configured as an external identity provider for OpenShift. See link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/{ocp4-ver}/html/authentication_and_authorization/external-auth[Enabling direct authentication with an external OIDC identity provider].
```

> .Procedure

Reviewer: This procedure has 13 top-level steps (recommended max is 10). Can steps 1-3 (define environment variables) be merged into a single step?

Author: Done

. Define the namespace where {keycloak} is installed:
+
[source,shell]
----
KEYCLOAK_NAMESPACE=<KEYCLOAK_NAMESPACE>

> ----

Reviewer: Use `source,bash` and `__<placeholder>__` with `subs="+quotes"` for formatted placeholders. Same applies to step 2 (lines 29-32).

```suggestion
[source,bash,subs="+quotes"]
----
KEYCLOAK_NAMESPACE=__<KEYCLOAK_NAMESPACE>__
----
```

. Define the {keycloak} realm used for OpenShift authentication:
+
[source,shell]
----
OPENSHIFT_REALM=<REALM>
----

. Define the {keycloak} URL:
+
[source,shell,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
KEYCLOAK_URL=https://$({orch-cli} get route keycloak -n $KEYCLOAK_NAMESPACE --template='{{ .spec.host }}')
----

. Create a `{prod-id}` client in the {keycloak} Admin Console:
+
--
.. Within the realm used for OpenShift authentication, select *Clients* on the left side of the navigation bar.
.. Select the *Create client* button.
.. On the *General Settings* page:
+
... Enter `{prod-id}` in the *Client ID* field.

> ... Optionally enter a *Name* and *Description* for the OAuth client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
... Optional: Enter a *Name* and *Description* for the OAuth client.
```

... Click *Next*.
.. On the *Capability config* page:
+
... Toggle *Client authentication* to *On*.
... Click *Next*.
... Click *Save*.

> .. Navigate to the *Credentials* tab of the newly created client and copy the *Client secret* value. You will need this value in a later step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Navigate to the *Credentials* tab of the newly created client and copy the *Client secret* value for use when applying the OAuth client secret.
```

--

. Add the `{prod-id}` client to the audiences list in the OpenShift authentication configuration:
+
[source,shell,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
{orch-cli} patch authentication.config/cluster \
  --type='json' \
  -p='[
    {
      "op": "add",
      "path": "/spec/oidcProviders/0/issuer/audiences/-",
      "value": "{prod-id}"
    }
  ]'
----
+
[NOTE]
====
If you have multiple OIDC providers configured, adjust the array index in the path
(currently 0) to match your {keycloak} provider's position in the configuration.
====

. Wait for the `kube-apiserver` cluster operator to roll out the configuration changes:
+
[source,shell,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
watch {orch-cli} get co kube-apiserver
----

. Create a {orch-namespace} for {prod-short}:
+

> [subs="+quotes,attributes"]

Reviewer: Missing `source,bash` prefix. Use `+attributes` (with `+` prefix) for consistency.

```suggestion
[source,bash,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
```

----
{orch-cli} create {orch-namespace} {prod-namespace}
----

. Create a secret for the OAuth client in the {prod-short} namespace:
+
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
{orch-cli} apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: oauth-secret
  namespace: {prod-namespace}
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/part-of: che.eclipse.org
stringData:
  oAuthSecret: __<CLIENT_SECRET>__ <1>
EOF
----

> <1> The client secret value from the `{prod-id} client in {keycloak}.

Reviewer: Unclosed backtick before `{prod-id}`.

```suggestion
<1> The client secret value from the `{prod-id}` client in {keycloak}.
```

. Create the `ConfigMap` with a {keycloak} certificate in the `{prod-namespace}` namespace.

> If {keycloak} uses a certificate that is already trusted by OpenShift, this step may be omitted.

Reviewer: Conditional step — use `Optional:` prefix.

```suggestion
. Optional: Create the `ConfigMap` with a {keycloak} certificate in the `{prod-namespace}` namespace. If {keycloak} uses a certificate that is already trusted by OpenShift, skip this step.
```

        CHE_OIDC_USERNAME__CLAIM: '<USERNAME_CLAIM>' <3>
        CHE_OIDC_USERNAME__PREFIX: '<USERNAME_PREFIX>' <4>
EOF
----
<1> The claim to use for extracting user groups.
<2> The prefix to add to group names. Empty string means no prefix.
<3> The claim to use for extracting the username.
<4> The prefix to add to usernames from the external authentication system.
+
[NOTE]
====
These values must match the corresponding claim and prefix settings configured in the `authentication.config/cluster` resource. To view the current cluster configuration, run:

[source,shell,subs="+attributes"]
----
{orch-cli} get authentication.config/cluster -o yaml
----
====
+
. Create the {prod-short} instance with `{prod-cli}`:
+
[source,shell,subs="+attributes"]
----
{prod-cli} server:deploy \
  --platform openshift \
  --che-operator-cr-patch-yaml che-patch.yaml
----

. Update a `{prod-id}` client to set {prod-short} callback URL:
+
--
.. Open {keycloak} Admin Console
.. Within the realm used for OpenShift authentication, click on `{prod-id}` client
... In the *Valid redirect URIs* field, enter the redirect URIs for your {prod-short} installation.

> Can be obtained with the following command:

Reviewer: Missing periods. "click on" → "click". "Can be obtained" is a passive fragment.

```suggestion
.. Open the {keycloak} Admin Console.
.. Within the realm used for OpenShift authentication, click the `{prod-id}` client.
... In the *Valid redirect URIs* field, enter the redirect URI for your {prod-short} installation. To obtain the redirect URI, run the following command:
```

+
[source,shell,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
echo "$({orch-cli} get checluster {prod-checluster} -n {prod-namespace} -o jsonpath='{.status.cheURL}')/oauth/callback"
----
... Click *Save*.
--

. Create a `ClusterRoleBinding` to grant users access to {prod-short}:
+
[source,shell,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
{orch-cli} apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  name: openshift-developers
roleRef:
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: self-provisioner <1>
subjects:
- apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: Group
  name: __<GROUP_NAME>__ <2>
EOF
----
<1> Users must have at least the `self-provisioner` role to access {prod-short}.
<2> The name of the user group from {keycloak} that should be granted access to {prod-short}.

> .Verification steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Verification
```
